MSC4041: http header Retry-After for http code 429 (#4041)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/4041-retry-after-header-rate-limiting.md

the burden of handling retries by honoring the http header `Retry-After`. As explained in 
[RFC 9119 - HTTP Semantics](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#field.retry-after) this header is optional
and contains either a (relative) value for the delay in seconds or an (absolute) date.

The current Matrix Client Server API specification does not take this header into account. This wastes the 
potential that current http libraries offer in terms of automated retry handling.

## Proposal

In order to allow developers to make use of the automated retry handling capabilities of http libraries
home servers shall use the http header `Retry-After` in case they respond with an http error 429.
The value of `Retry-After` (in __seconds__) is meant to be a delay after receiving the response and must be 
calculated in order to comply with the specification in [RFC 9119 - HTTP Semantics](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#field.retry-after).

With the introduction of the http header `Retry-After` the usage of the existing `retry_after_ms` property in the response body becomes deprecated.

## Potential issues

> In order to maintain backward compatibility with existing client libraries home servers shall use both the `Retry-After` header and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to maintain backward compatibility with existing client libraries homeservers shall use both the `Retry-After` header and the
```

minor nitpick: homeserver is one word

Reviewer 2: There's a couple of other occurrences of the incorrect spelling as well.

Reviewer 3: Will apply manually after merging - can't edit the PR itself.

and [urllib3](https://urllib3.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/urllib3.util.html#urllib3.util.Retry)) ease
the burden of handling retries by honoring the http header `Retry-After`. As explained in 
[RFC 9119 - HTTP Semantics](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#field.retry-after) this header is optional
and contains either a (relative) value for the delay in seconds or an (absolute) date.

The current Matrix Client Server API specification does not take this header into account. This wastes the 
potential that current http libraries offer in terms of automated retry handling.

## Proposal

In order to allow developers to make use of the automated retry handling capabilities of http libraries
home servers should add an http header `Retry-After` in case they respond with an http error 429.
Since the body of the response already contains a property `retry_after_ms` (in miliseconds) the value 
of `Retry-After` should be the calculated by rounding up `retry_after_ms / 1000` to the next integer. 
Doing so would correspond to a (relative) delay (in seconds) as defined in 
[RFC 9119 - HTTP Semantics](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#field.retry-after).

> 

Reviewer 4: I am wondering if it makes sense to define backwards compatibility in the msc to define what to do if both are present?

I guess the obvious would be first checking for the header and if not present use the json (until that value is deprecated and removed.)

Author: @MTRNord I've added a note regarding backward compatibility as you suggested.

and [urllib3](https://urllib3.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/urllib3.util.html#urllib3.util.Retry)) ease
the burden of handling retries by honoring the http header `Retry-After`. As explained in 
[RFC 9119 - HTTP Semantics](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#field.retry-after) this header is optional
and contains either a (relative) value for the delay in seconds or an (absolute) date.

The current Matrix Client Server API specification does not take this header into account. This wastes the 
potential that current http libraries offer in terms of automated retry handling.

## Proposal

In order to allow developers to make use of the automated retry handling capabilities of http libraries
home servers should add an http header `Retry-After` in case they respond with an http error 429.
Since the body of the response already contains a property `retry_after_ms` (in __milliseconds__) the value 
of `Retry-After` (in __seconds__) should be the calculated in order to comply with the specification in 
[RFC 9119 - HTTP Semantics](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#field.retry-after).

## Potential issues

> With the introduction of the http header `Retry-After` the usage of the `retry_after_ms` property in the response body becomes deprecated.

Reviewer 5: This doesn't feel like it belongs in the issues section. If the intention is to deprecate it, that should be part of the main proposal.

Author: Moved it into the proposal section.

Existing SDKs may use client libraries that might be able to honor the http header `Retry-After`. Since 
this header is currently not part of the response developers might have created purpose-built functions

> in order to handle rate-limiting correctly.

Reviewer 5: There's no mitigation suggested for this problem, so it might be worth explaining why: presumably just not anticipated to be a big enough problem?

In order to maintain backward compatibility home servers should use both the `Retry-After` header and the
`retry_after_ms` property in the response body.

> Client libraries are advised to use the values in this order:

Reviewer 6: I agree it should prescribe this order specifically (the other way around doesn't make much sense given the deprecation of `reply_after_ms`, assuming that all platforms we're usually dealing with can read raw HTTP response headers or manage retries directly.

> Client libraries are advised to use the values in this order:

Author: Servers MUST return both values and client libs SHALL use the given order.

1) `Retry-After` http header.

> 2) `retry_after_ms` property in the response body.

Reviewer 5: This also feels like part of the proposal, so I'd say it belongs in the proposal section.

being overloaded by enforcing rate-limits to selected API calls.
If home servers limit access to an API they respond with an http error code 429 and a response body
that includes a property `retry_after_ms` to indicate how long a client has to wait before retrying.

Some http libraries (like [Ky](https://github.com/sindresorhus/ky), [got](https://github.com/sindresorhus/got
and [urllib3](https://urllib3.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/urllib3.util.html#urllib3.util.Retry)) ease
the burden of handling retries by honoring the http header `Retry-After`. As explained in 
[RFC 9119 - HTTP Semantics](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#field.retry-after) this header is optional
and contains either a (relative) value for the delay in seconds or an (absolute) date.

The current Matrix Client Server API specification does not take this header into account. This wastes the 
potential that current http libraries offer in terms of automated retry handling.

## Proposal

In order to allow developers to make use of the automated retry handling capabilities of http libraries
home servers should add an http header `Retry-After` in case they respond with an http error 429.

> Since the body of the response already contains a property `retry_after_ms` (in miliseconds) the value 

Reviewer 2: I think we should officially deprecate this at the same time.

Reviewer 3: Errors on Matrix are a bit strange: deprecation I think would be inappropriate with their design, but personally I feel deprecation is a good thing. 

The backing context is errors are meant to be richer and provide more detail than the HTTP headers.

Reviewer 2: I suppose, it just seems odd to duplicate information when there's a standard way to do it. I don't feel strongly, however.

Reviewer 7: In this case, I'm not sure it's worth

Author: I'd prefer a clean cut and remove the `retry_after_ms` response. Why do it the matrix-way if there is an HTTP standard for the same purpose?

Reviewer 7: We should deprecate instead of cut, as if servers immediately dropped sending `retry_after_ms`, most clients that have not yet implemented `Retry-After` would fail to back off correctly.

Author: Is there a policy in the spec on how to deal with deprecated structures? Like X deprecated in v1.10, will be removed in 1.15 and 2.0?

Author: Updated proposal to deprecate `retry_after_ms`.

> of `Retry-After` should be the calculated by rounding up `retry_after_ms / 1000` to the next integer. 

Reviewer 8: There is an issue here that you could unfortunately land on a worst case (i.e. `retry_after_ms` for `5001ms` becomes `6 seconds` under this rule.

A separate question is whether we realistically care about subsecond delays, as if anything it allows a service to balance out more. Perhaps leaving in `retry_after_ms` allows more advanced scripts to perfectly limit loads while "dumb" applications simply wait a little longer.

Author: The definition in the [RFC](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#field.retry-after) says it has to be in seconds. So there is no way of being more accurate without violating the RFC.

Do you know how the value for `retry_after_ms` is calculated by home servers?

Author: Does anyone know of a client library that is so time critical that rounding up the value could cause it to malfunction?

Reviewer 8: Oh yeah not disagreeing with your proposal, I think the RFC is perhaps a bit silly to use seconds.

Reviewer 3: We can leave it as an implementation detail for how to populate a header. Some servers might decide to round up, down, or to nearest. 

For the MSC we should be calling out that it's seconds though, as most developers are used to milliseconds.

Author: > We can leave it as an implementation detail for how to populate a header. Some servers might decide to round up, down, or to nearest.

I'm not sure this will work. If the value of `retry_after_ms' is 5999 ms and server are rounding down the header value will be 5 seconds. In the worst case clients will be fast enough to make the request before the 5999 ms are over and run immediately into the next 429 error.

Reviewer 3: The server is the one which decides both `Retry-After` and `retry_after_ms`, so it can just not make bad decisions. At the spec level, we are less concerned about preventing conflicts a server can self-resolve.

Reviewer 8: A better way to resolve this might be a note within the spec to mention that your header value is in seconds, and therefore the header should be >= that value.

Then implementations have options. Synapse will round up, because we're not chagning the retry_after_ms behaviour.

Reviewer 8: @ThomasHalwax are you happy to make this change?

Reviewer 7: @Half-Shot I think your suggestion [here](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4041#discussion_r1301864312) equates to the original text of the proposal before this thread started...

Author: @anoadragon453 I think @turt2live has a very good point here. It's up to the homer server to deal with the values it sent to the clients. If they round up or down does not matter and should no be mentioned in the spec. The only condition that must be met is that the value for `Retry-After` is in seconds.

Reviewer 7: The current text looks fine to me.

Doing so would correspond to a (relative) delay (in seconds) as defined in 
[RFC 9119 - HTTP Semantics](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#field.retry-after).

## Potential issues

Existing SDKs may use client libraries that migth be able to honor the http header `Retry-After`. Since 
this header is currently not part of the response developers might have created purpose-built functions
in order to handle rate-limiting correctly.

If the http header `Retry-After` is introduced existing SDKs might behave differently thus leading to an
unexpected behaviour.

In order to maintain backward compatibility home servers should use both the `Retry-After` header and the

> `retry-after-ms` property in the response body. 

Reviewer 2: I think this uses hyphens in a few spots when it should be underscores.

Author: Thank you! Fixed it!

In this case, client libraries are advised to use the values in this order:

1) `Retry-After` http header.
2) `retry-after-ms` property in the response body.

## Alternatives

N/A

## Security considerations

N/A

## Unstable prefix

> N/A

Reviewer 8: Do we think we need one? I'd argue not, given it's a stable bit of RFC9110. This spec just outlines how one should feel free to use the header in addition to the retry field.

Reviewer 2: I agree, but should probably call it out.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Since this MSC is using a standard HTTP header, it will not use a unstable prefix.
```
